Proposal for sphinxcontrib-jquery (#9665)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/dev/design/sphinx-jquery.rst

sphinxcontrib-jquery
====================

> JQuery will be removed from Sphinx 6.0.0. We can expect 6.0.0 to ship in late 2022. See also:

Author: Good idea!

* https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/7405
* https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/10070
* https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx-hoverxref/issues/160
* https://github.com/readthedocs/sphinx_rtd_theme/issues/1253
* https://github.com/pydata/pydata-sphinx-theme/issues/764

This is a "request for comments" for a community-owned Sphinx extension that bundles jQuery.

Overview
--------

Comment deadline:
  November 1st, 2022

package-name:
  ``sphinxcontrib-jquery``

> python package:

Author: Yes, definitely, fixed

ownership:
  Read the Docs core team will implement the initial releases of an otherwise community-owned package that lives in https://github.com/sphinx-contrib/jquery

functionality:
  sphinxcontrib-jquery is a Sphinx extension that provides a simple mechanism for other Sphinx extensions and themes to ensure that jQuery is included into the HTML build outputs and loaded in the HTML DOM itself.
  More specifically, the extension ensures that jQuery is loaded exactly once no matter how many themes and extensions that request to include jQuery nor the version of Sphinx.

scope:
  This extension assumes that it's enough to provide a single version of jQuery for all of its dependent extensions and themes.
  As the name implies, this extension is built to handle jQuery only.
  It's not a general asset manager and it's not looking to do dependency resolution of jQuery versions.

Usage
-----

The primary users of this package are
**a) theme and extension developers** and
**b) documentation project owners**.

Theme and extension developers:
  The following 2 steps need to be completed:

  #. A Sphinx theme or extension should depend on the python package ``sphinxcontrib-jquery``.

>   #. Calling either ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery`` or ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery_if_sphinx_lt_6``.

Author: Ah yes `gt` :see_no_evil:

>   #. Calling either ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery`` or ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery_if_sphinx_lt_6``.

Author: That's a good idea! Will update it!

>   #. Calling either ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery`` or ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery_if_sphinx_lt_6``.

Author: This is now added

  In addition to this, we recommend extension and theme developers to log to the browser's ``console.error`` in case jQuery isn't found. The log message could for instance say:

    "<package-name> depends on sphinxcontrib-jquery. Please ensure that <package-name>.setup(app) is called or add 'sphinxcontrib-jquery' to your conf.py extensions setting."

Documentation project owners:
  If you are depending on a theme or extension that did not itself address the removal of jQuery from Sphinx, you can patch up your project like this:

  #. Add ``sphinxcontrib-jquery`` to your ``requirements.txt``.

>   #. Add ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to your ``extensions`` setting in ``conf.py``.

Author: If you are using a theme or extension that didn't address the Sphinx 6 release, you can fix it yourself as a project owner.

A project owner doesn't call the function but simply needs to enable the extension. It's the theme or extension that can call these methods directly to save the project owner from having to update their `conf.py`.

``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery(app)``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds jQuery no matter what, but at most once.
It's useful for themes and extensions that want jQuery added unconditionally or if they want to handle the conditions themselves.

``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery_if_sphinx_lt_6(app)``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds jQuery if Sphinx is older than version 6, at most once.
This is recommended for extensions and themes that maintain compatibility of Sphinx before and after version 6.

> Adding ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to a documentation project's ``conf.extensions`` will call this function.

Reviewer: I wouldn't add this method. I think it's better if theme/extension maintainers deal with this by themselves that will know more about their package than us.

Author: Let's just say that Sphinx 7 reintroduces jQuery :smile: or we need to detect the existence of another popular extension shipping jQuery.

Author: Alright, we have this solved with a single function and a parameter (which later turned into a configuration value)

  More specifically, the extension ensures that jQuery is loaded exactly once no matter how many themes and extensions that request to include jQuery nor the version of Sphinx.

Scope:
  This extension assumes that it's enough to provide a single version of jQuery for all of its dependent extensions and themes.
  As the name implies, this extension is built to handle jQuery only.
  It's not a general asset manager and it's not looking to do dependency resolution of jQuery versions.

Usage
-----

The primary users of this package are
**theme and extension developers** and
**documentation project owners**.

Theme and extension developers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following 2 steps need to be completed:

#. A Sphinx theme or extension should depend on the python package ``sphinxcontrib-jquery``.
#. In your extension's or theme's ``setup(app)``, call ``app.setup_extension("sphinxcontrib.jquery")``.

In addition to this, we recommend extension and theme developers to log to the browser's ``console.error`` in case jQuery isn't found. The log message could for instance say::

>   if ($ == "undefined") console.error("<package-name> depends on sphinxcontrib-jquery. Please ensure that <package-name>.setup(app) is called or add 'sphinxcontrib-jquery' to your conf.py extensions setting.")

Reviewer 2: Accidentally an operator here:

```suggestion
  if (typeof $ == "undefined") console.error("<package-name> depends on sphinxcontrib-jquery. Please ensure that <package-name>.setup(app) is called or add 'sphinxcontrib-jquery' to your conf.py extensions setting.")
```

>   if ($ == "undefined") console.error("<package-name> depends on sphinxcontrib-jquery. Please ensure that <package-name>.setup(app) is called or add 'sphinxcontrib-jquery' to your conf.py extensions setting.")

Author: I think the original suggestion was to have a final safety net? If the extension is responsible for this, then the extension is required for it to fire. But the tip is to install the extension :)

>   if ($ == "undefined") console.error("<package-name> depends on sphinxcontrib-jquery. Please ensure that <package-name>.setup(app) is called or add 'sphinxcontrib-jquery' to your conf.py extensions setting.")

Author: So I would say: No, it doesn't make sense. But it makes sense to put this in the extensions README.md as a small tip for extension owners.

Documentation project owners
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are depending on a theme or extension that did not itself address the removal of jQuery from Sphinx 6, you can patch up your project like this:

> #. Add ``sphinxcontrib-jquery`` to your ``requirements.txt``.

Reviewer 2: To cover other supported installation methods besides requirements files:

```suggestion
#. Add ``sphinxcontrib-jquery`` to your installed dependencies.
```

#. Add ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to your ``extensions`` setting in ``conf.py``.

Calling ``app.setup_extension("sphinxcontrib.jquery")``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When a Sphinx theme or extension calls `setup_extension() <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/extdev/appapi.html#sphinx.application.Sphinx.setup_extension>`_, a call to ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.setup(app)`` will happen. Adding ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to a documentation project's ``conf.extensions`` will also call ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.setup(app)`` (at most once).

Reviewer: This paragraph is confuses me a little. It seems that even doing both, calling `setup_extension()` _and_ adding it to `conf.extensions` will call the function _just once_ which I understand it's not how it works.

I would rephrase it as:

```suggestion
Either calling `setup_extension() <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/extdev/appapi.html#sphinx.application.Sphinx.setup_extension>`_ from the theme/extension or adding ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to a documentation project's ``conf.extensions``  will produce a call to ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.setup(app)`` (at most once).
```

Author: These are different patterns.

One pattern is for extension owners (that call `setup_extension`), the other pattern is for project owners that write a `conf.py`.

> which I understand it's not how it works.

That's how it works though :) It's even implemented here:

https://github.com/sphinx-contrib/jquery/blob/master/sphinxcontrib/jquery.py#L8

Reviewer: Awesome! Thanks 👍🏼

In ``sphinxcontrib.jquery.setup(app)``, jQuery is added. The default behaviour is to detect the Sphinx version and include jQuery via `app.add_js_file <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/extdev/appapi.html#sphinx.application.Sphinx.add_js_file>`__ when Sphinx is from version 6 and up. jQuery is added at most once.

Config value: ``jquery_force_enable``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When setting ``jquery_force_enable=True``, jQuery is added no matter the Sphinx version, but at most once. This is useful if you want to handle alternative conditions for adding jQuery.

Reviewer: I would call it `jquery_force`. If we want to go verbose here, I'd say `jquery_force_include`.

.. warning::

  If you set ``jquery_force_enable=True``, you most likely should also add ``Sphinx>=6`` to your theme's/extension's dependencies since versions before this already bundles jQuery!

Release
-------

All releases follow semantic versioning: ``<major>.<minor>.<patch>``

* ``major``: Changes that break existing themes and extensions - we'll aim to only ever have ``1.x.y`` releases!
* ``minor``: Changes that contain jQuery updates or substantial feature additions.
* ``patch``: Bug fixes and added compatibility.

For distributed packages with a longer lifecycle, we propose a loose pinning of the patch and minor versions to allow for future updates, which are likely to happen when jQuery receives security updates.

> Example: ``sphinxcontrib-jquery>=1.0.0,<2.0.0`` will include all compatible future releases, including jQuery upgrades.

Reviewer: I think this section is outdated and we should probably remove it, since we won't be following. The 1.x and 2.x already happened.

Author: Yes, I don't know what we are following. @AA-Turner please observe the thoughts behind using a versioning scheme :arrow_up:

Reviewer 3: Counter: https://hynek.me/articles/semver-will-not-save-you/

Pinning doesn't make much sense in the Python ecosystem as I see it, given the culture of longer deprecations. Given the intentionally limited scope there should be no breaking changes, but breaking is different from one man to the next.

A

Author: I don't think the blog post is what you think it is.

That aside, if you - as the maintainer - does not want to use SemVer, then the proposal cannot mention anything about it.

So I'll remove it. I disagree, but I will remove it :+1:

Reviewer 3: I linked the post (one of many on both sides of the debate) as my view is that how maintainers choose to implement SemVer doesn't necessarily align with users' expectations of SemVer, and I concluded that it isn't worth the hassle. That was the read I got from Hyneks's post, though perhaps I did misinterpret it.

A

Author: I did also notice that you've already shipped two releases as "1.0.0" and "2.0.0", so the user-directed warnings of the blog post are spot on :smile: 

It's no biggy, and I think that we - as users of Python libraries - are rather used to projects that look like SemVer but aren't (yet). When I read a version string, I interpret it together with its release history and community... the longer the history, the more likely that it has a settled understanding of SemVer.

If we have a complicated understanding of version (as the proposal goes), then there is also a risk that we forget our own guidelines or someone else takes over the project and never reads them.

So I have no problem seeing this from another perspective, I'll remove this from the proposal.

Author: And definitely just want to repeat what I sad about this... no biggy! I'm sure the extension will do its job well without this and I thank you for the efforts :pray:

Reviewer 2: As far as this section is concerned, I agree with @humitos and don't think we need to define versioning too strictly. It seems we're on a different path from the plan noted here.

I'm still :+1: on semver though. It at least gives users and maintainers *some* common language to describe backwards compatibility. There will be edge cases and bugs, but designing around these is always a trap.

Reviewer: I'm fine by "not following semver" on some projects. However, if that's the decision made, I usually try to use a different version string that does not look like semver to avoid misunderstanding in communication. That is, for example, instead of using `x.y.z` and _not_ following semver, I'd prefer to use `2022.10.24` (calver, or something similar).

That said, I don't have a strong opinion on this and either is fine to me 👍🏼 

My 2 cents.

Author: To complicate things @humitos ... let's say _for some given project_ we are NOT using SemVer now, but we might use it in the future... then having a version scheme that _looks like_ SemVer but _isn't_ would be necessary :exploding_head: 

I agree that using a scheme that definitely doesn't look like SemVer is good if you decide to not use SemVer.

Author: I removed everything about versioning now, let's take it as it comes :+1:

jQuery version and inclusion
----------------------------

Sphinx has kept relatively up to date with jQuery, and this package intends to follow.
The most recently bundled jQuery version was v3.5.1 and only two releases have happened since: 3.6.0 and 3.6.1.
The 3.6.0 release had a very small backwards incompatibility which illustrates how harmless these upgrades are for the general purpose Sphinx package.

> Therefore, we propose to start 1.0.0 at 3.5.1 (the currently shipped version) and subsequently release 3.6.1 as the first update of jQuery as 1.1.0.

Reviewer: This also makes references to 1.x, but it should be updated.

The bundled jQuery version will be NPM pre-minified and distributed together with the PyPI package.

The minified jQuery JS file is ultimately included by calling `app.add_js_file <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/extdev/appapi.html#sphinx.application.Sphinx.add_js_file>`__, which is passed the following arguments:

.. code:: python

  app.add_js_file(
      get_jquery_url_path(),
      loading_method="defer",

>       priority=200,

Reviewer: Where this 200 as priority comes from? Is it 200 for some specific reason?

Author: See https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/extdev/appapi.html#sphinx.application.Sphinx.add_js_file

Author: Also, I think that 200 is the correct value.

Reviewer: From that link, I'd say that we should use `500: default priority for extensions` since `200: default priority for built-in JavaScript files` and this is not a built-in javascript (it _was_, tho).

      integrity="sha256-{}".format(get_jquery_sha256_checksum())

>   )

Reviewer 2: This feature is still on my wishlist :+1:

I'd like to see the default behavior installing from a local file. Google doesn't need our help tracking users

Author: Yes, the understanding with @AA-Turner is that we will contribute the remaining changes from the proposal. So both the local file and the `integrity` check will be added :+1:

#. Add ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to your ``extensions`` setting in ``conf.py``.

``sphinxcontrib.jquery.add_jquery(app, force=False)``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds jQuery if Sphinx is from version 6 and up. Adds jQuery at most once.

When setting ``force=True``, adds jQuery no matter what, but at most once. This is useful if you want to handle alternative conditions for adding jQuery.

Adding ``sphinxcontrib.jquery`` to a documentation project's ``conf.extensions`` will call this function with ``force=False``.

.. warning::

>   If you call this function with ``force=False``, you most likely should also add ``Sphinx>=6`` to your theme's/extension's dependencies since versions before this already bundles jQuery!

Reviewer: I think this is not what we want. The idea of the `force=False` argument was to do not have this condition.

* Using `force=False` will only add jQuery if Sphinx>=6
* When `force=True` will add jQuery _always_, not matter what

That way, themes calling this function with `force=False` and using Sphinx>6 will get the jQuery added. Also, themes using Sphinx<6 won't get jQuery added.

Author: Totally agree, it should say:

```
If you call this function with ``force=True``
```
